MSC4502: Targeted and unrestricted room member queries (#4502)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4502-as-unrestricted-membership.md

Reviewer: Implementation requirements:

* [ ] Server (respecting scopes)
* [ ] Appservice (using scopes)

Author: Server: https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/19974

# MSC4502: Targeted and unrestricted room member queries

Matrix allows users to query room members via either [/rooms/{roomId}/joined_members] or
[/rooms/{roomId}/members]. Both endpoints require the user to be joined to the room themselves. In
some cases though, users can have a legitimate reason to query room members for rooms that they are
not joined to. This can, for instance, apply to admin users or to privileged application services
such as moderation tooling.

Another problem of the existing endpoints is that they require loading all members. This is wasteful
in cases where only a specific user's or server's membership in a room is required.

The present proposal addresses these issues by introducing a new endpoint for querying a single
subject's membership in a room and guarding the endpoint behind a dedicated OAuth scope token
available to both users and application services.

## Proposal

A new Client-Server endpoint `GET /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/is_joined` is introduced. The
endpoint accepts the following query parameters:

> - `mxid` (string): A [user identifier].

Reviewer 2: `mxid` vs `user_id`

Seems we actually (surprise to me) use both in the spec, I would have thought we used `user_id` in most places though.

I know it's minor but this sort of inconsistency, when stacked up with others, makes a spec feel a bit eclectic

Author: Good call. `user_id` also feels slightly clearer to me. Have made the switch in 02a05d76b7e9a48c6755a38ce3d939e5e6cebdf2.

Author: Oh actually, I needed to roll that back in a420cc3cdd747ccd081bf46030777b52db56436e. `user_id` clashes with the parameter that application services can use to emulate other users.

# MSC4502: Unrestricted room member access for application services

Application services have the ability to [masquerade] as a local user when making requests to the
Client-Server API. This can, among others, be used to verify a user's membership in a room. This
only works for local users, however. In some cases an application service might need to verify that
a remote user is joined to a room known to the local homeserver.

> One example for this is the Matrix RTC Authentication Service from [MSC4195: MatrixRTC Transport

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One example for this is the LiveKit SFU Authorisation Service from [MSC4195: MatrixRTC Transport
```

...I maintain calling this software *also* MAS is a bad idea.

Using LiveKit Backend]. A remote user hits this service to get access to a local user's RTC media
stream. A precondition for this is that both users share a room where a MatrixRTC session is
established. In order to verify this, the service needs to check if the remote user is actually
joined to that room.

This proposal extends the [Application Service API] with a new scope to permit services to look up
room memberships on any room known to the homeserver.

## Proposal

A new optional property `scopes` is added at the top level of the service [registration file].
`scopes` is an array of strings. The only permitted value is `unrestricted_member_access`.

> ``` yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

id: "My Service"
url: null # No traffic required
as_token: "..."
hs_token: "..."
sender_localpart: "_my_service"
namespaces: # No namespaces required
  users: []
  aliases: []
  rooms: []

> scopes: [ "unrestricted_member_access" ]

Author: @turt2live remarked that the word "scopes" might be a little too general and cause tension with identically named things in the authentication / authorization world.

Reviewer 4: Happy to go with something else, albeit I was rather hoping we could directly hook into OIDC scopes to reduce the implementation burdern on homeservers. Whereby ASes now have hardcoded scopes in their registration file, which neatly hooks into the permissions HS developers will already be building for clients.

There may also be some AS-only scopes like the one in this MSC.

Author: > [...] albeit I was rather hoping we could directly hook into OIDC scopes to reduce the implementation burdern on homeservers. 

Oh. So that would mean defining something like `urn:matrix:client:rooms:joined_members:unrestricted` in the CS API to give the calling user access to `/joined_members` on any room and reusing that scope value in the AS API?

Reviewer 4: yeah, pretty much. Has the side benefit that the spec could in theory allow users with permission (server admins) to request the same perm?

Author: Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. And I think it's not actually a big change to the MSC. We'll basically just anchor the scope in another place where it can see further reuse.

Author: Fixed in e302d6df125dfc6b11b4941a337463e291778729.
